Apple Butter: Apple butter begins with the preparation of applesauce, then spices are added and the mixture is cooked longer. After adding the spices, flavorings, and sweetener, remove the pot lid, and continue cooking over medium-low heat until the mixture becomes very thick, stirring frequently. The process may take an hour or two depending on the water content of the apples. Cool thoroughly before refrigerating.

As an alternative, you can bake your pureed, spiced apples in a shallow pan in the oven at 300 (gas mark 2) for 2 hours until thickened. With either method, check for doneness by putting a little dollop of apple butter on a dish and turning the dish upside down. The mixture should stick to the plate.

If you plan to make a large quantity for gift giving, have hot sterilized jars ready and spoon your hot apple butter into the jars, leaving only 1/8-inch at the top. Seal immediately and cool.



APPLE RELISH (Charoset)

The traditional name for this recipe is Charoset, a Hebrew word that describes a mixture of fruits, nuts, and wine eaten at the Passover Seder. This wine-free version features dried fruits and cinnamon typically used in Sephardic charoset recipes. The fruits almost always include apples that are shredded or finely diced. While European Charoset is usually a simple combination of apples, sweet wine, and walnuts, the Sephardic Jews from Spain and the Middle East enhance their relish with a variety of dried fruits and add sweetening. Here we offer an irresistible recipe that follows the Sephardic tradition. This Sephardic combination is so tasty and nutritious, it ought to be enjoyed throughout the year. Serve it as a sweet accopaniment to any savory meal.
Core and finely chop or coarsely shred the apples. Transfer to a large bowl, add the remaining ingredients, and mix well. Sweeten with evaporated cane juice to taste. Refrigerate the relish and allow to marinate for 4 to 12 hours. Stored in a covered container in the refrigerator, Apple Relish will keep for three to five days.
APPLE HAYSTACKS WITH ROSE WATER

Here's an easy raw dessert that takes advantage of newly harvested apples when they're at their peak of freshness, sweetness, and juiciness. Since this dessert requires very little preparation, it can be made shortly before serving to avoid apples turning brown.