Apple’s plans to make itself into a big player in the entertainment industry are now coming into focus. In recent months, the company has outspent Facebook and YouTube — two other tech companies that have also taken steps into original programming — as well as the traditional TV studios. In a few cases, it has also beaten Netflix in bidding wars.
Since October, Apple has made deals for 12 projects, nine of them “straight-to-series” orders — an aggressive method of creating new programming that skips the pilot-episode stage.
When Apple began courting producers last year, it said it had a budget of about $1 billion to work with. Now it is becoming clear that the company will blow well past that figure. Perhaps more meaningful, though, is that Apple’s strong brand name and its willingness to write big checks have quickly made it a top draw for show creators and stars.
Apple’s Hollywood prospects seemed dim as recently as last June, when it rolled out its first original series, a reality show called “Planet of the Apps.” Although it had some big names attached — including Gwyneth Paltrow and the former NBC Entertainment co-chairman Ben Silverman — the show was largely perceived as a dud.
The week after “Planet of the Apps” made its debut, Mr. Cue greatly improved the company’s standing in the entertainment industry by hiring the veteran television executives Zack Van Amburg and Jamie Erlicht away from Sony Pictures Television, the studio behind “Breaking Bad” and “The Crown.”
The two executives moved quickly to build Apple Worldwide Video from the ground up, expanding its staff to roughly 40 people and opening divisions for adult dramas, children’s shows and Latin American and European programming. In putting together its slate of 12 projects (and counting), Mr. Van Amburg and Mr. Erlicht made deals with big names including Reese Witherspoon (for three shows), Steven Spielberg, Damien Chazelle, M. Night Shyamalan, Jennifer Aniston, Octavia Spencer and Kristen Wiig.
“We’re all in,” Mr. Cue said in Austin. “We’re completely all in.”
What remains to be seen is whether the tech giant’s efforts will lead to success in an industry where, as the screenwriter William Goldman once observed, “Nobody knows anything.”
Apple was built on the careful work of engineers who created platforms and products that helped define tech culture. But there is a difference between making successful products and creating hit shows — a lesson learned the hard way by Microsoft and Yahoo, which not long ago had big plans for original programming, only to abandon them.
With the rise of streaming, the old Hollywood system is cracking. With plans to spend up to $8 billion on content in 2018, Netflix has committed to a strategy of offering something for everyone, and other companies have been tempted to try their luck in an increasingly crowded field. There were 487 scripted shows released last year, a number that will rise to more than 500 in 2018. To keep up with Netflix, Amazon and Hulu have thrown money at new projects, while marquee cable players like HBO and FX are focused on holding their place in the market.
Apple has not shared specifics with its new business partners on how it will distribute the shows, but they may be housed in its TV app, which allows access to video services like HBO Now and Hulu. Nor has the company announced whether its projects will be behind a pay wall, but the company will most likely require viewers to have subscriptions to access its shows at some point.
As Apple moves deeper into Act One of its foray into entertainment, it is pinning its hopes on Mr. Van Amburg and Mr. Erlicht, who made their names at Sony despite being saddled with budgets significantly smaller than those of their rivals.